# Blumenstock response

Milton Zuanic

23/01/20

The use of big data and its promise of benefiting the world and society on the surface appears as a justified goal with grounded evidence to suggest that it is not just an achievable goal but a goal already within reach. But to look at big data blindly would be a disservice to those algorithms and the people they are meant to serve. Blumenstock’s hope for a humbler data science presents itself as a less overbearing AI program and focuses more on the people that fall on both sides of the data. This approach would combat many of the pitfalls faced by big data currently such as biased algorithms (ignorance), lack of validation (overconfidence), and unanticipated effects (lack of research).

	In regards to Biased algorithms, the data being compiled often comes through the form of the technology and its activity. In areas where there are wealthier more affluent people the data could tell a more accurate story, particularly when compiling population density/ migration, however when one uses the same algorithm to acquire similar data  in poorer regions the data will clearly be skewed. Families may not have as much readily available technology or any particular reason to acquire said technology in the first place.
	
	Blind trust in the functionality of algorithms is an all too difficult issue to combat due to the rapidly evolving technological world we live in. As technologies change, so do the algorithms, as the algorithms change new tests are needed, but when technologies change at ever increasing rates the amount of testing that is done if any becomes far and few between. The truth of the matter is that there are no possible ways to validate these algorithms functionality from behind a computer screen. The algorithms work, in the minds of their creators, because they are thought of a computer program tracking the mobile activity of different cell phones. And when one looks at the algorithm that way, it does work, however people forget that there is someone on the other end of that cell phone that is not as robotic or as easy to understand when the only way one can follow this part of the data is through a pinned location on a map. A perfect example of algorithms failing can be seen in the form of people gaming the system. Impoverished areas are more likely to have thatched roofs than those of wealthier areas a piece of data that resulted from the combination of satellite images and cell phone activity. The algorithm hoped to give relief to those in poorer areas that required it, however, knowing that this action was occuring people began putting thatch over their own sturdier building to also receive relief that was not necessary.

One must also not just look at the algorithm’s application but rather the creators themselves. A failed act of good intent can be seen in the form of the 1 laptop policy they tried to employ in Africa. This policy although on the surface appears beneficial, actually created strife in families. What order would these laptops be received, why that order, if random how would jealousy manifest itself. Would the older generation approve of this technology. A lack of awareness and effort being put into learning more of the culture before blindly starting this motion could have greatly benefitted the program and ultimately could have prevented the failure with just a little bit more cultural awareness. This goes back to Blumenstock’s view that humble data is the future. It will be the combination of human interaction and algorithms that will greatly alter the world in the way people had hoped big data would have done before. 

